Jovian: Calldata footprint block limit (#317)
ethereum-optimism/design-docs: protocol/da-footprint-block-limit.md

of transactions alongside gas, this approach adjusts the block gas limit to account for high estimated DA usage without
altering individual transaction gas mechanics. Preliminary analysis shows minimal impact on most blocks on production
networks like Base or OP Mainnet.

## Problem Statement + Context

<!-- Describe the specific problem that the document is seeking to address as well
as information needed to understand the problem and design space.
If more information is needed on the costs of the problem,
this is a good place to that information. -->

The current L1 cost model doesn't account for *limited L1 data availability (DA) throughput*. 
This can lead to network congestion for batchers if the throughput on L2s surpasses that of L1 blob space, or if blob
space is congested for other reasons.

Current L1 throughput is 6 blobs per block at target with a max of 9 blobs per block.
This is approx. `128 kB * 6 / 12 s = 64 kB/s` or `96 kB/s`, resp. The L1 cost is proportional to the L1 origin’s base
fee and blob base fee. But Most OP Stack chains have gas targets high enough to accept far more than 128kb of calldata

> per (2s) block. So the calldata floor cost doesn't nearly limit calldata throughput enough to prevent.

Reviewer: Trails off here. I think you mean priority fee auctions. Recommend introducing PFA acronym.

> The current measure to counter high DA throughput that's being deployed on productio networks is batcher throttling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current countermeasure for high DA throughput that's being deployed on production networks is batcher throttling.
```

Similarly to the regular gas usage of transaction calldata, we calculate a transaction’s _DA footprint_ by taking
its RLP-encoding, calculate the compressed transaction DA usage estimation from
[Fjord](https://specs.optimism.io/protocol/fjord/exec-engine.html#fjord-l1-cost-fee-changes-fastlz-estimator)
and multiply it by a factor, the _DA footprint gas scalar_, to get to the transaction’s DA footprint. 

```python
da_usage_estimate = max(minTransactionSize, intercept + fastlzCoef*fastlzSize / 1e6)
da_footprint = da_usage_estimate * da_footprint_gas_scalar
```

Here, `fastlzSize` is the length of the FastLZ-compressed RLP-encoding of a transaction.

Now when evaluating whether a transactions still fits into a block, we take the maximum over the two resources, regular
total gas use of all transactions, and new total DA footprint, and see if this max is still below the block gas limit.
The Multidimensional Gas Metering design introduces a new block field `gas_metered` to differentiate it from `gas_used`
as the sum total of all transaction's gas used. However, it is proposed to just repurpose a block's `gas_used` field to

> hold the maximum over both resources' totals:

Reviewer 2: I would expect `gas_used` header fields that don't match the sum of the gas used by each transaction to break something somewhere. I don't know what would break, but I'd be surprised if nothing is relying on that invariant.

```python
block.gas_used = max(sum(tx.gas_used), sum(tx.da_footprint if tx.type != DepositTxType))
```

A block's total DA footprint only takes non-Deposit transactions into account, because Deposit transactions aren't part
of batches, so they don't contribute to a block's DA usage.

This definition has the advantage that the base fee update mechanics just keep working, now taking into account high
total block DA footprint.

The DA footprint cost is comparable to the calldata floor cost. If it's set to a higher value, say 400, you
can expect _roughly_ a 1/10 of incompressible calldata to fit into a block compared to only limiting it by
transaction gas usage alone. If the block is mostly low-calldata transactions that use much more regular gas than DA
footprint, this new mechanism wouldn’t have any effect. This is the case for the vast majority of blocks.

### DA footprint gas scalar

> I propose to make the DA footprint gas scalar parameter configurable via the `SystemConfig`. The next Ethereum hardfork

Reviewer: Perhaps clarify _who_ can change the configuration, i.e. `SystemConfigOwner`.

Author: done

period (4/29 - 8/26). Then for each block, the DA footprint was estimated by calculating the FastLZ-based DA usage
estimation for each transaction, and then taking the total sum. This was then compared to the block's gas limit and gas
usage to see if the block would have been impacted by a DA footprint limit. If the DA footprint was below the block's gas
usage, then there wouldn't have been any impact, since the new block gas usage would be defined as the max over the
total transaction gas usages and DA footprints. If it went over the gas usage, but not gas limit, then the impact would
only have been that the new block gas usage would have been set higher (so the base fee may have potentially increased
faster), but the block still wouldn't have been limited. Only if the DA footprint also went over the gas limit, would it
have limited that block's transactions to a smaller DA footprint. For those blocks, we also looked at the
distribution of the excess DA footprint as an indicator of how much those blocks would have been limited.

The following tables show, for each analyzed chain, the resulting statistics.
* *Scalar*: DA footprint gas scalar value.

> * *Effective Limit*: The DA usage limit that the given gas scalar would imply (`block_gas_limit / da_footprint_gas_scalar`), in estimated compressed bytes.

Reviewer 2: I think we can proceed with just a single scalar. Here's how I think we'd approach setting the scalar.

No chain can sustain more than 64 kb/s of compressed data because that's the target throughput for the entire blobspace, so we all have `l1_target_throughput = 64000`.

```
da_footprint_gas_scalar = block_gas_limit / (block_time * l1_target_throughput * estimation_ratio * elasticity_multiplier)
```

For Base, our estimated DA sizes in production seem to be about 50-100% higher than the actual sizes, giving us an `estimation_ratio = 1.5`. With an elasticity of 3, a block time of two seconds, and a block gas limit of 150M, we get:

```
da_footprint_gas_scalar = 150,000,000 / (2 * 64000 * 1.5 * 3) = 260.4
```

The base fee should only begin to rise when the DA footprint is above the block gas target. To double-check that, we calculate `da_usage_target = block_gas_limit / elasticity_multiplier / da_footprint_gas_scalar = 150,000,000 / 3 / 260 = 192,307`, which is a good point for Base to start pricing out DA usage. Unfortunately, this produces a `da_usage_limit = block_gas_limit / da_footprint_gas_scalar = 150,000,000 / 260 = 576,923`, which is significantly higher than the `always_throttle` value we already use. But I think that's okay! We would get base fees that increase when estimated DA usage is above 192kb per block, and would rely on sequencer throttling to enforce the maximum in practice.

Assuming an `estimation_ratio = 1.5` for all OP Stack chains, here are the values that price out DA throughput above 64 kb/s.

OP Mainnet = 40,000,000 / (2 * 64000 * 1.5 * 2) = 104.2
Ink = 30,000,000 / (1 * 64000 * 1.5 * 2) = 156.25
Unichain = 30,000,000 / (1 * 64000 * 1.5 * 2) = 156.25
Soneium = 40,000,000 / (2 * 64000 * 1.5 * 2) = 104.2
Mode = 30,000,000 / (2 * 64000 * 1.5 * 2) = 78.125
World Chain = 60,000,000 / (2 * 64000 * 1.5 * 2) = 156.25

Since most chains don't need to be concerned about a DA target that prices out usage, they can focus on using the scalar for the DA **limit** rather than the target. Multiplying each of those values by `blob_limit / blob_target = 9 / 6` will produce scalars that prevent a single chain from ever exceeding the throughput of the blob limit on its own. Scalar values higher than that can be used to target a particular share of blob throughput.

Setting all chains to `da_footprint_gas_scalar = 260` shouldn't cause problems for any chain (though World Chain would want to change this if they approach 60% of blob throughput). The original proposal of 800 is probably fine for chains that expect to use less than 10% of blob throughput.

> * *Effective Limit*: The DA usage limit that the given gas scalar would imply (`block_gas_limit / da_footprint_gas_scalar`), in estimated compressed bytes.

Author: Thanks @niran for your thorough analysis of the scalar value! After fixing several flaws in our analysis, we have updated the numbers for all chains and it seems that a scalar value of 400 would have minimal to no impact: back testing with this scalar showed that for almost no blocks do their DA footprint exceed the gas used. This value would be slightly higher than your proposed default of 260, but given that the observed actual impact would be minimal, I'd favor to go with this higher value as a default to achieve stronger ecosystem-wide protection against DA spam by default. Individual chains may still choose to increase their DA usage targets and limits by lowering the scalar.

Starting with a scalar of 600 did we observe meaningful impact for some chains, where the DA footprint went over the total gas used for a significant percentage. Interestingly, for the Base random sample, even with 600 it did go over the gas usage only in 5.4% of blocks.

> * *Exceeding Limit*: Number and percent of blocks for wich the total DA footprint exceeds the gas limit. Those blocks
>   would have been limited to include fewer transactions.
> * *Exc. Gas Usage*: Number and percent of blocks for wich the total DA footprint exceeds the total gas usage. For those blocks, the `block.gas_used`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Exceeding Limit*: Number and percent of blocks for which the total DA footprint exceeds the gas limit. Those blocks
  would have been limited to include fewer transactions.
* *Exc. Gas Usage*: Number and percent of blocks for which the total DA footprint exceeds the total gas usage. For those blocks, the `block.gas_used`
```

  field would equal the total block DA footprint instead of the total transaction gas used.
* *Avg. Utilization*: Average utilization of DA footprint resource.
* *Max Utilization*: Maximum utilization of DA footprint resource.

#### OP Mainnet

**[Random Sampling](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-analytics/blob/main/notebooks/adhoc/jovian_analysis/notebooks/saved_output_html/op_random_2025-04-29_2025-08-26.html):**

> _Sample Size:_ `51,840`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Sample Size:_ `51,840` blocks
```
?

| 600    |  66,666         | 2 (0.00%)       | 17 (0.03%)     | 4.1%             | 168.2%          |
| 800    |  50,000         | 10 (0.02%)      | 47 (0.09%)     | 5.5%             | 224.2%          |

![OP Mainnet (random) DA size estimation distribution](./assets/da-footprint-block-limit/OPM-random-DA-distribution.png)

**[Top 1 Percentile Calldata Usage](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-analytics/blob/main/notebooks/adhoc/jovian_analysis/notebooks/saved_output_html/op_top_percentile_2025-04-29_2025-08-26.html):**
_Sample Size:_ `52,165`

| Scalar | Effective Limit | Exceeding Limit | Exc. Gas Usage | Avg. Utilization | Max Utilization |
|--------|-----------------|-----------------|----------------|------------------|-----------------|
| 160    | 250,000         | 0               | 0              | 1.1%             | 40.0%           |
| 400    | 100,000         | 0               | 1              | 2.7%             | 99.9%           |
| 600    |  66,666         | 4 (0.01%)       | 8 (0.02%)      | 4.1%             | 149.9%          |
| 800    |  50,000         | 17 (0.03%)      | 23 (0.04%)     | 5.5%             | 199.8%          |

> #### Base

Reviewer: We should double check these figures against estimates from the base team cc @nira.
